The tapes are rolling.
Okay, the tapes are rolling. I will ask you the first question. If you could
give us some background where you grew up, how you got interested in what you
do, and how you came to write science fiction. Okay. I grew up in Chatham, New
Jersey, which is a suburb of New York, about 27, 28 miles west of New York. and
I always thought I was going to be an engineer. My dad was an engineer, an
electrochemical engineer. But for some reason, once I got to college, and I came
to college out here where I am now in Elsa, Principia College, I got into
chemistry as a major and decided that it was too specialized and then somehow or
other switched to English and just went on in English. I had done some reading
of science fiction as a high school student, but then I pretty much dropped it
until about eight years ago. And I was in bed for a while and just started
reading science fiction for entertainment and became fascinated with it all over
again. So that's how I got back into it.
what other kinds of writing do you do now professionally besides science fiction
and fantasy well I write a lot of reviews and quite a bit of poetry some essays
and some scholarly articles
pretty much run the gamut I teach a lot of writing and I try to do the kinds of
writing that I professionally that I ask my students to do so I can give them
examples I had never published fiction before the breaking of Northwall,
though. I felt that quite a gap. I guess it's plugged now. How does this kind of
writing fit in with writing science fiction? It's really very different, because
most of these other kinds of writing are much more exacting, I think, in some
ways. That is, in a sense, science fiction, although it should be good, should
also be easy and entertaining. And so I think there's an atmosphere of fun that
surrounds it, both in the writing and the reading of it. And for me, it's really
entertainment. I can do it when I'm tired late at night. Very often, I sit down
to write, and pretty soon I'm very wide awake. I can't do that with an essay,
certainly not with a poem. I think that writing poetry, as I've done now for
well over 20 years, has helped me a great deal, though, in gaining a feel of the
sounds of words and the kind of sound clusters that evoke certain meanings. and
as you know in poetry every sound, every word is chiseled and worked on and
worried about a great deal more than in entertaining fiction but still I think
the art of poetry feeds over into the other art I think those are the main
differences that I see There is a subcategory of science fiction, which is
science fiction poetry. Have you ever attempted any of this or does that tempt
you to try it? Yeah, I have written some. I used to belong to the Science
Fiction Poetry Association, but I let my membership lapse. And for some reason
or other, my imagination, my poetic imagination, doesn't drift in the direction
of science fiction. Once in a while I'll do something. I find that when I do
write speculative or science fiction poetry, it tends to get very complicated
and hard to understand. And I'm not an obscurantist in poetry. I believe that I
give poetry readings, for example. I don't believe in giving a reading that
mystifies everybody. I like a certain amount of immediacy. So it hasn't worked
very well for me. In the three novels, occasionally there were songs. Were these
original compositions original poems? Yes, yes. They're all original songs, and
some of them are, you know, really just quatrains or hymn stanzas. There's
nothing terribly remarkable. magical. I tried to, especially in the breaking of
Northwall, use a variety of styles, inventing new styles for each of the tribal
groups, and that was kind of fun. The most serious poem, I think, in all three
volumes is one that is sung near the end of Dome in the Forest, And that's
actually a poem I've had around for years, and I think I kind of like it. It's
sung by a character named Tristal.
A friend of mine told me the other day that she has just been divorced, and I
guess it was a friendly divorce or something. And she copied the poem and sent
it to her ex-husband, which is kind of amusing to me. It's on page 211 of the
Dome in the Forest. It starts, Goodbye, My Favorite Stranger. I think that's the
most serious poem in the three books. I'm trying to remember, was this when he
was recalling his dead friend who was buried up on the hill? No, it's after
that. and Tristal and Tor are logging for the winter, and Stell goes to visit
them. And Tristal sings in this song, and Stell is touched by it. And later on,
it's – oh, I'm sorry. It happens after they've been logging. They come back to
Pelbargan, and they sing it for Stell, and he's touched by it. that Aro's wife
is really very disturbed by it because she realizes that Tora and Tristal are
leaving, and so she kind of cramps around a little bit, and then they go to bed.
Early in the book, there's a song or poem which is recited by a strange
character named Buto, and he is under the influence of drugs. He's interrupted
in it. I rather like that poem, too.
That is on page 51 of The Dome in the Forest.
Well, it must be nice, even though you have let your membership lapse in the
Poetry Association, that you can still write your poems and throw them in your
books. Yeah, I must admit, It's a sort of form of self-indulgence.
Okay. You mentioned that the breaking of Northwall was your first published
science fiction effort. Yeah. So I'd like to talk a little bit about the
mechanics of that. How long did it take you to... Oh, how did the idea evolve?
How long did it take you to think the idea, work it out, and then start getting
it on paper? Well, it was a very strange experience. It was one of the strangest
experiences I've ever had. I always carry a notebook with me because I do write
a lot and I like to have something ready if I get an idea. And if I'm ever
waiting for something, I use the notebook to amuse myself. I was waiting for a
meeting to start in the beginning of July and this strange image came into my
mind. And so I just started writing it down. And when the meeting did start, I
really didn't hear any of the meeting because the idea was generating. And after
the meeting, I went to my office and cranked a piece of paper in the typewriter
and started typing. And I typed the first three pages of what's now in print and
where the ideas came from. I had no idea. And the rest of the summer, I worked
on it every day. I guess I must have been three or four days into it before I
really realized I was writing a novel. And by September 5th, I had a first
draft, which was substantially what the novel became. I did revise it, but not
heavily. And I just don't know how it happened. I mean, it just sort of came,
and I didn't plot it. I've flotted the other two, but I just sort of let it
happen and would go back to the typewriter every day to find out what was going
to happen next. I never got stuck. I always seemed to know what was going to
happen. One day I went to church and I was trying to work out a battle theme, a
climactic battle with the Tantal. and I guess you're not supposed to go to
church for this reason but I didn't hear anything in church because it all
started coming clear and after church I had lunch and started writing and with
one short break I wrote till midnight and I had finished the battle scene and
written 35 pages which is by far the most I've ever written in one day but
really I was sort of amazed at the experience all along because it seemed to be
happening to me rather than something I was consciously doing and the other
novels took a lot more effort but this one was just sort of handed to me in a
way Your mentioning of the battle scenes brings to mind a question especially at
the climax of the breaking of Northwall, the battles were really drawn out and
the strategy was plotted. The other two books, it was mainly skirmishes and one
-on-one combat, but do you have any experience with either planning battles or
from historical perspectives? Are you interested in that sort of thing? Because
they were very realistic. No, I have absolutely none. I've never been in the
army. I've read very little about that sort of thing. I don't know where that
comes from. I often wondered myself how I keep gravitating toward battle scenes
when I don't think of myself as very belligerent. But I think the reasoning out
of how it ought to be done and what would happen sort of fascinates me. And
sometimes they're useful as metaphors for various kinds of human conflict.
You discussed in quite a bit of detail the geography of the Three Rivers area
where certainly the first one took place and parts of the others. Why did you
locate the three main cities there? Where did that idea come from? Well, I've
lived here two miles downriver from where I put Pelbargan now for 18 years,
and I'm utterly fascinated with this area of the United States. I think I became
that way when I was way back in high school. I read Bernard Devoto's book,
Course of Empire, which is mostly about the Louisiana Purchase and the move
westward, especially Lewis and Clark in their expedition. And the place has
always had a sense of drama to me around here. And also, this particular area
has a fantastic archaeological history. it's the one area in all of North
America that has the most, the densest Indian or prehistoric population. And
I've done a good deal of study of archaeology, too. It just seemed like a
natural place to put a rather settled civilization or culture, rather, and have
these others impinge upon it. So I guess it really emerges from my own
experience here. And I teach American literature, so I'm very aware of the
American continent. I think it's a very dramatic place. So much has happened
here so rapidly.
It's a dramatic place to be. So I guess that's the reason. Really, I come at
science fiction from a different angle from most people. Out of much more of a
literary background than most science fiction writers, and particularly out of
American lit. So I think my books tend to bridge the two types a little more
than most books do.
Probably the thing to me that made the novels most interesting was the
descriptions of the various tribes and their little idiosyncrasies and the
names. Where did you come up with all this? Well, I envisioned the Pelbar as a
group that had been started by a woman named Amanda Pel who had been a,
she's sort of a feminist. And she is a metallurgist, or was, from a caterpillar
tractor up in Peoria. But she survived the holocaust by the fact that she was
spelunking down in the Ozarks. And it would be quite natural for her to set up a
feminist society. and I really I sort of tried to create the Pelbar as a
settled society with what you might call a nesting instinct and a natural
combination of self-protectiveness and non-aggressiveness although they're
certainly capable of great destructiveness but potentially a settled place like
that becomes a kind of mother of civilization. So that was what was in my mind
there. I created the Shumai and Santani out of my memories of, well in part, out
of my memories of the conflict of Caesar and the Celts in Britain. The Shumai
are very Celtic in their behavior because they're enthusiastic artistic, kind of
reckless, and unorganized, whereas the Sentani are much more Roman. They
organize into their star band and do everything in a pattern, organized way, and
I invented some backgrounds for these groups. Shumai as offspring of the
children of one farmer in southwestern Minnesota named Aaron Shumacher. The
Santani the Explorer Scout Troop led by Antonio Santani who was a watchmaker in
Memphis who happened to have a love of Roman history They were on a field trip
to a coal mine in Tennessee and so escaped the Holocaust there and created their
society along quite different lines.
The weapons in the breaking of Northwall really come out of local archaeology
because during most of post-glacial Indian history in this area, if the Indians
were users of spears, only fairly recently, well, 2000 years ago, they begin to
develop bows and arrows. And that coincides with their becoming a more settled
culture adapting to agriculture and that kind of thing. And I guess that culture
shift was all also in the back of my mind, although, you know, The strange thing
about it was I figured all this stuff out after I wrote the book, you know, that
aha, that's where it must have come from, rather than consciously adopting these
things for the book. It might sound strange, but anyway, that's how it happened.
I want to hit some more on that in a minute. okay you've explained kind of the
macroscopic development of the tribes but if we start zeroing in on people the
individuals of the tribes they had their loves and their hates and the rituals
and the religions and the games you must be interested in games at least to put
so many different variations of games in the books and that lended character to
these people too Yes. Well, I have this theory that the
shumai, being in love with the open, in a sense, are not necessarily rendered
stupid by that. And in some cultures, they're really extremely aware of their
surroundings, and they have a great sense of play. so it seemed quite natural to
me that they would develop these games and two of the games for example a star
game and a game of Nana are both functional for them too the one helping them
locate themselves and the other helping them sharpen their reflexes so they're
both games and they're educational tools as well The other interesting tribe to
me was the Emory. Oh, yeah. Are they Italians? Well, there are some Italian in
their background. Yeah, they're located north of Denver, up toward Boulder.
And they're just the people in that area who survived. But the particular reason
for their particular function they have in the book is that I was trying to use,
among other things, various societies as ways of looking at the question of
domination. I mean the Pelbar are a female dominant society. The only Santanis
we see, we never see them at home. And they are sort of a military society but
fairly democratic in their organization. The Shumai are a male dominated society
but kind of mildly so. and I needed a society in which the domination was very
great and the Emory served that function in the book I discovered in writing the
book that I was trying to see what are the effects of domination in society
because every society does dominate in some ways certain groups dominate others
and I discovered that The more severe the domination was, the more danger the
dominators really incurred because they lost a clear grasp of the feelings and
aspirations of the people they were dominating. And Emory are really a study in
that. The situation has grown so top-heavy that it collapses. And I wanted
Jestak, the hero, who seems to operate as a catalyst wherever he appears in the
book, just to be the person who gives it that push that makes it topple. And I
think that was very good of him to do. I tried to indicate that he naturally
didn't cure the society of these habits right away, but they are moving in the
direction of a more reasonable sense of government.
Was Jestak modeled after any historical figure? No, I tried to just make him up.
And I even, I've tried to model characters after people I know, but I've never
been able to make it work. About two pages into the character, they grow so
vivid in so much themselves that they cease being anybody I know about, and just
acquire their own personalities.
I discovered only last year when someone showed me that in the National
Geographic, there is a minor deity in Pakistan named Jestak, and I thought I'd
made the word up.
the ends of the circle my interpretation of it was that it was whimsical
compared to the other two books didn't seem as serious and we learned about all
these strange societies and they were quite odd so it appeared to be whimsical
to me did you have that in mind or is that just my interpretation well, I think
It was somewhat more whimsical. The problem I set for myself there was I asked
what are the skills that a young married couple has to know in order to be
successfully married. and the book starts with a marriage that's just fallen
apart almost immediately and in essence they learn the skills and
as because of the peculiarities of Pelbar society, Aro has much more self
-knowledge than does Stel. What she lacks is a knowledge of the aspects and
virtues of manhood, as well as some of the disagreeable sides of males.
Everything that happens to her in the book instructs her further about the
nature and the validity of men. But still doesn't have a very clear sense of
himself. His experience in my mind is a sort of an odyssey. That is, it's a a
psychological journey and the things he meets are the things I think he has to
learn about himself. The oddest of all the societies is the roti, which is, I'm
not even sure it works, but the curious thing is that most people who read the
book simply take it as a book of a series of adventures and it works for them.
Maybe I oughtn't to confess it, But, you know, if you add an E in front of roti
and a C at the end, you end up with the word erotic. And in essence, this is the
problem, the psychological problem that Stel is brought to confront when he runs
into them. he's now lived through the winter and he's growing more comfortable
in his aloneness and the problem of eroticism arises in his experience he tries
to flee from it somehow it keeps following him and in order to escape it he
decides to be beyond it as I've seen some people do and in a sense this is his
entering into the the Ozar Society, which is a society of old people. And the
problems he encounters there are essentially problems that one encounters with
age, decrepitude, jealousy, inability to function, and impending death. And in
essence, he discovers that he can't really survive in that society or function
in it. in essence, it coughs him up. And as soon as he leaves, along comes the
roti again. And so he tries a new approach to ridding himself of that problem by
just simply killing them. But in killing eroticism, he also kills feeling,
essentially. So he enters into a feelingless period, a period of intense self
-examination. and in the mountains he meets in the character named Skula. He
meets what he might become if he continues those tendencies and gets to have
what I think of as a conversation with himself. And he does a lot of suffering,
but out of this, he emerges with a kind of self-mastery. and everything after
that that he meets, he meets as someone more or less in control of himself.
Which is really what he has had to learn, as I could see of it anyway.
This is something on the spur of the moment as an English student in college
years ago, I was always curious about, OK, you just explained what Stale was
going through through these various devices. Did you sit down before you wrote
the book and said, aha, I'm going to have him develop in this manner? Or is this
kind of a post-mortem analysis of what you did? Did you set out to write this
and this was the symbolism? OK. When I wrote The Breaking of Northwall, so many
people expressed amazement that I didn't sit down and plot it, and I just sort
of wrote it. Sometimes I felt, well, gee, they know more about this than I do,
because most of them were writers. I had better plot the next book. And so I
spend quite a bit of time planning it all out and analyzing the problems that
were to be encountered in the book. So it's a very different kind of book. It's
much more of a planned book. I think I tried to consciously direct it at a
fairly juvenile audience, too. and the themes are all fairly well spelled out
fairly explicitly in the book. I have had hopes that it would begin to be read
in advanced high school or early college classes, and I know I tried it out on a
group of freshmen I taught, which was a rather odd experience but at any rate
they seem to understand it and they all they wrote a paper on it and the
thematic statements were in there so it's much more of a literary production
than North Wolf.
In The Dome in the Forest you have been introduced us to another set of people
the people that have been in the dome for centuries. And you went to great
lengths to portray the advanced knowledge that they might bring as a two-edged
sword. Does this come from your own private feelings? Yes, it does. And also,
one of the main things I was trying to do in the book was to examine the
difference between intuition and logic as means of human understanding. And
there are certain characters in the book, like Stael and Aro, and like Ruthann,
who comes from the dome and almost immediately marries a character named Blue.
They're people who combine, to a certain degree, feeling and thought, or
intuition and logic. And they very quietly succeed in advancing their societies.
But they're also extremes, as represented by Tor the Shumai as a man of
incredible intuition, and Eilin from the Dome as a person of nearly pure logic.
And those two really ought to get together, but they sort of instinctively also
distrust each other. in the end well, in the book Pelbaragon goes through a
severe internal struggle as to whether to accept the Dome people into their
society and in essence, the struggle to me is whether or not the society is
going to turn from being essentially a religious society to being much more of a
technological society and they decide in favor of technology, but it's not
entirely a victory as I see it, just as it isn't in our world. I think what we
see going on in the Falkland Islands now is a good example of the degree to
which technology has outrun the ability to relate to one another as human
beings. And as the book continues, we see the logical people, the merely logical
people, continually making gross mistakes. And the intuitional people,
particularly Tor, finding less and less of a place in the central society of the
Heart River, that is, Talbar. And in the end, Tor and his nephew are sort of
coughed up. They leave. They go essentially exploring, which is what intuition
tends to do. and Eolind remains, but not entirely happily. You know, in essence,
I don't think that either Tor or Eolind will ever be happy because they're too
intense and they're too one-sided. But I tried to portray the assets that you
get with each of these kinds of thoughts and also the liabilities. The merely
logical people people do not perceive H Webb's humanhood when he penetrates the
dome, and they're quite willing to contemplate disrespecting him in order to see
how he works, because they don't have feelings. And, I think, I don't know,
ultimately, without intuition and feelings, without that outreach of sympathy,
we get ourselves in terrible trouble. And yet, we need logic. So that's
essentially what I had in mind.
Towards the end of that book, you describe the situation that led to the Great
Fire, and by some chance it resembles slightly the situation that our world is
in now. What do you think the chances of something like that actually occurring
are? Well, I am one of those people who are worried about it. So, the thing is
we keep building more and more sophisticated devices for destroying ourselves.
And the thing is, too, that even if Russia and the United States keep under
control because we're relatively sophisticated in our perception of what might
happen, Right now, of course, Britain and France and red China, India, almost
certainly Israel, almost certainly South Africa have the bomb. Let's see, did I
leave anybody out? I think that's it. And it looks as though Pakistan will have
it soon. If the Israelis don't keep bombing Iraq, they're going to have it. I
understand that Argentinians are manufacturing fissionable material. So, and
there are much more volatile nations, which are likely to have the bond pretty
soon. And I think that poses an immense threat to humanhood, because
particularly
of all of the interlacing treaties and alliances that everybody seems to have,
that very easily, if Israel were threatened by atomic weapons, it would almost
certainly defend itself by nuclear means. and it would be very difficult for the
U.S. and Russia to stay out of that. I feel that disarmament is one of the most
important questions we have facing us today. What's it going to take to affect
something like that? Well, I don't know. I hope it doesn't take another
disaster,
another dropping of the bomb anywhere, Certainly, it's going to have to take a
revision of the basic attitudes of the politicians of the major powers. I don't
believe they're asking the right question because they seem to be asking, you
know, how can we prevail? How can we become dominant? And the question that
should be asked is, how can we survive?
We are approaching global problems with village mentalities and ultimately this
is one of the very great uses of science fiction. I think it expands the thought
to see the real implications of problems we get ourselves into. I guess in your
books since the people on a more primitive level they can make mistakes and it's
not quite they're a little more forgiving than if we make mistakes now with the
technology that we have Yeah I suppose it must have been a disaster for say a
small village on the coast of Britain in early medieval times to have a whole
gang of Viking ships sail up and burn the place to the ground. But even as
disastrous as that was, it was only local. And the problem now is that our
disasters tend to be awfully widespread. You just can't run away.
We'll leave the morbid subjects for now. You talked earlier about all this
information where the various tribes got started. So surely these three books
aren't going to be the only ones that we will see in this milieu. No. The fourth
book, which is called The Fall of the Shell, will be out in October. I'm working
on a fifth right now, which is tentatively titled An Ambush of Shadows. And I've
projected two more. I don't have them very elaborately plotted, but more or
less, and I'm quite sure there will be more beyond that. But these are, this is
as far as I see it very clearly.
Will these be paperback or hardback releases? They'll be paperback, as have the
first three. one thing the three books so far have had different cover art it's
not immediately apparent that they're a series I was particularly struck by the
cover the Barbieri cover on the Dome of the Forest I didn't know what it was
until I read the passage towards the end and obviously the artist had read the
book or had read that section anyway which is very rare were you pleased in
general with the covers and what's your comments on that one in particular Well,
Darryl Sleet, who did the cover of The Breaking of Northwall, is also doing the
cover of The Fall of the Shell. And when I first saw the cover of Northwall, I
was really kind of shocked because it didn't look literally like my theory of
what Northwall looked like. And the more I looked at it, though, the more
pleased I became. because it seems to me to be metaphorically a very good North
Wall, a kind of soaring, defiant edifice. The Ends of the Circle cover kind of
disappointed me a little. I guess it's the section of the book which is set
around Ozark, and I think that it has proven the least successful of the three
covers because as I found out, the cover sells the book many times. But I don't
know. I like it because metaphorically it does suggest the long trek to the West
and the presence of nuclear echoes from the past. The Dome in the Forest cover,
though, did not really come about as you anticipated. Kind of an odd story
because when I was halfway through the book and I talked to my editor about what
it was going to be a light, he told me, we have this cover sitting around here
and we don't know what we're going to use it for. Would you mind if I send it to
you to see if you like it for your book? And so he did. And I liked the cover
very much. And so I actually wrote the cover into that scene near the end of the
book. And I think that it fits the theme of the book very nicely. I'm really
more and more pleased with it all the time because it's not a dome blowing up or
anything. It is, in essence, a kind of monument to the old Shumai spirit,
which recalled to me what Henry Thoreau says in his book, The Main Woods, that
the truest user of the forest is the poet because he takes the best of the
forest and leaves it as it was. and uh what tor tries to tell starc about his
son is that uh yes he has died but he has also affirmed the human spirit and uh
which he has by giving his life for the preservation of others and the
preservation of a way of life which he and they have thought of as being very
fruitful, and one that kind of merges with things that uses the environment
without destroying it or violating it. This scene is right near a kind of
microcosmic time of fire. That is, the modern weapons get inserted into, it's
almost like anachronism, even though what is in the future, they get inserted
into a primitive society, and before long they get away again and destroy an
entire valley, a beautiful valley. And the situation is corrected by those who
have a much greater respect for the environment, one of which dies in the
process, and that's part of what the book affirms. You see, in a sense, I'm
trying through the series to indicate, I hope realistically, but to indicate
anyway, that if social growth happens in conjunction with technological growth,
we're going to do a whole lot better than if we simply give ourselves to
technology and remain social dwarfs. I think this is one of the great dangers of
our society today.
At this point I have three more questions on my list and we need to change our
tape, just change the sides, so if you'll bear with us a couple of minutes.
We'll change it. If you'd like to take a break or anything, this would be a good
time.